there are in fact many roads to
Alzheimer's disease and it's things like
marijuana alcohol and football and then
a study found that people had had a
simple carbohydrate based diet had a
400% increased risk of getting
Alzheimer's but one of the major classes
is gosh Dr Daniel aan is the renowned
psychiatrist and brain health expert who
has scanned over 260,000 brains
including Justin Bieber Miley Cyrus and
Kendall Jenner to determine what we need
to do for Optimum brain health in 2024
the word of the year was brain rot why
because people are worried that their
habits are shrinking their brain like
food gaming social media pornography
what about working with bad for
your brain and then is there anything
nonobvious that we do to our children's
brains yes and this is so important
because this is one thing a lot of
parents do without knowing the
consequences for their children and
we'll talk about that what about
negative thinking well we just this huge
study on this and the science is really
clear it decreases activity in your
preal cortex which impacts your
motivation focus and mood it is
detrimental to your brain so how can you
kill the negative thoughts well there's
a whole bunch of things when is sap on
head-to-head has been shown to be
equally effective as anti-depressants
and then whenever you feel sad or mad or
nervous what I want you to do is it's so
simple
I have been forced into a bet with my
team we're about to hit 10 million
subscribers on YouTube which is our
biggest Milestone ever thanks to all of
you and we want to have a massive party
for the people that have worked on this
show for years behind the scenes so they
said to me Steve for every new
subscriber we get in the next 30 days
can $1 be given to our celebration fund
for the entire team and I've agreed to
the bet so if you want to say thank you
to the team behind the scenes at D of a
CE all you've got to do is hit the
subscribe button so actually this is the
first time I'm going to tell you not to
subscribe because it might end up
costing me an
[Applause]
[Music]
awful Dr Daniel aan if someone's just
clicked on this conversation now and
they have no idea who you are which is
highly highly
unlikely can you tell me why listening
to you and this conversation and the
work that we're about to go through now
is so important for everyone even those
who believe that right now they have no
issues everybody has a brain that's
listening it controls everything they do
how they think how they feel how they
act how they get along with other
people and most people know it but don't
your brain is the organ of
intelligence character and every
decision you make and when it works
right you work right and when it doesn't
you have
trouble and most people have no idea
that their bad decisions their sadness
their anxiety their
insomnia their poor
relationship have has to do with the
physical
functioning of their brain so if they
want to be
happier they need to think about loving
and caring for their brain optimize your
brain you optimize your mind's
ability you mentioned scanning brains
there remind me again how many people's
brains youve scanned now so it's now
about 260,000
260,000 people's brains and you've
scanned some famous
brains yes actually people from nine
months old to 105 from
155 countries and it's public knowledge
I've been in Justin Bieber's docu series
seasons I scanned his brain I've scanned
Miley Cyrus's
brain um Mel Gibson just went on Joe
Rogan and talked about me scanning his
brain um Muhammad Ali Mike Tyson Jake
Paul
you also scanned my brain and you
actually taught me a lot from scanning
my brain which I'm did you think about
your brain after we talked about of
course I think about it all the time now
it's also interesting that in 2024 the
year just gone the word of the year was
the word brain
rot and that's interesting because the
subject of the brain I don't think has
been given the credit and the attention
it deserves really until recently and
much of your work has played into that
why do you think if you had to guess why
do you think Oxford University's word of
the year was brainroot
because people are worried that their
habits are
shrinking their brain
especially social media and digital
addictions I'm so hoping they'll go to
brain health
as be more
aspirational we've talked about a lot of
things on this show um one of the things
that really stuck with me is how the
content we consume can have a profound
impact on our brains we often think of
the chemicals the the drugs the alcohol
and all those things which I want to
talk about but one such piece of content
which I don't think we have talked about
is the impact of pornography on the
brain is there a link between brain
health and pornography
consumption you know it's such an
important question
and the first thing that comes to my
mind
is
exposing developing brains to
pornography is so dangerous and8 nine 10
yearold boys are being exposed to the
internet where they can see all sorts of
pornography when their brains aren't
anywhere near
the ability to discern what's good
what's not good what's healthy what's
not healthy and it's
deadening and I use that word
purposefully the nucleus accumbens which
is the area of your brain that produces
that responds to dopamine so dopamine
and I know you've done podcasts on
dopamine it's the
neurotransmitter that helps us with
motivation
which helps us with Focus which helps us
with happiness and mood and when the
nucle succumbent gets hit
repeatedly with pornographic images it's
like dopamine dopamine dopamine it
begins to deaden that area and then you
need more and more to begin to feel
anything at all it's why Fame is so hard
on the brain but
pornography especially in the young is
incredibly damaging to the brain so is
that applicable to all things that cause
like a really sharp burst of dopamine
and stimulation so you said there Fame
ponography I mean potentially gaming or
gambling those kinds of things um
alcohol is obviously one of those things
as well cocaine cocaine especially for a
developing brain especially for a
developing brain if there's any message
protect your brain until you're 25 and
then your brain will protect you but
until then your prefrontal cortex at
from third of your brain is not fully
developed which is sort of why God gave
you parents it's like so supervise it's
like oh my teenagers hate it if I
supervise them and yeah they hate it
more if you
don't um but what if you get to 25
and you're listening to this now and you
go Jesus I does this mean that I can do
nothing about my brain of course not I
mean what I've shown is let's just take
the NFL work H big damage right let's
stop lying about this football is a
brain damaging Sport and soccer as well
is a brain damaging sport so high levels
of damage 80% of my NFL players got
better when we put them on a
rehabilitation
program so if you've been bad to your
brain like non-stop gaming lots of
pornography terrible
food and all of a sudden you go oh I can
have a better
brain your brain can be better in as
little as a couple of months where you
just feel better think better your mood
is
better but it has to start with this
concept I think we've talked about brain
Envy it's you have to want to have a
better
brain when when people come to you what
is it they're
typically motivated by like in ter when
they come to you why do they come to you
is it because they've heard of your work
on the internet and they they want to
just they're curious about getting their
brain scanned or is do they usually come
with a symptom or some other
ailment no usually they come because
they're in pain that they're anxious
they're depressed they're um marriage is
falling apart or um their wife says come
or I'm going to divorce you it's not an
uncommon thing or they're struggling in
school they're not living up to their
potential in one way or another now
about 10% of the people come to us go
I'm fine but I want to see and I want to
be better and I don't want Alzheimer's
so a lot of people come because they
love a parent or grandparent that has
Alzheimer they realize there's a genetic
component to it and they don't want to
have that but that's really someone who
is Forward Thinking I
think more people come because they're
hurting what evidence have we got that
alcohol is bad for the brain and bad for
the rest of our body especially in
moderation well the S US Surgeon General
just came out wanting to put cancer
warning labels on all
alcohol
um that's sort of big evidence I mean
three years ago the American Cancer
Society came out against any alcohol
because drinking any alcohol increases
your risk of seven different
cancers and that's a big deal and then
the evidence I have and my first Clinic
was outside of the Napa Valley in
Northern California so alcohol is a big
thing and as I was looking at scans I'm
like your brain's older than you are
that alcohol is not a health food it is
detrimental to brain function and then
of course you know so I've been a
psychiatrist now I decided to be a
psychiatrist 46 years
ago the number one problem I see is
someone drinks and they make a bad
decision someone drinks and they say
something to their partner that they
just shouldn't have said or they drink
and they go to work or they drink and
they drive or they drink and it just
causes so much trouble and in 1999 I did
a show uh called the truth about
drinking and we took a young adult um
who had trouble with alcohol got him
sober scanned him and then on National
Television we got him drunk just like he
got drunk and it just crashed his
frontal loes and you just it's so clear
that alcohol takes the break off your
brain and so people use it to calm the
brain down but there's certain parts of
your brain you really don't want to go
offline the part that says don't say
that don't do that is that just when
when I've had one drink and then when I
say BR up I'm back to
normal or is this chronic well it
depends
one drink will
decrease um in a mild way your decision
making when it becomes
chronic your life begins to get out of
control because I'm wondering you know
if if people drink in moderation are
they going to see long-term impacts to
their brain what is there such thing
as um drinking just a little bit and
being
fine well you I think there's always
sort of a dose response there was a
study in Spain that looked at people who
had mild moderate and severe drinking
and they compared them to people who
didn't drink at all even the people who
only drank a little had
disruptions in the white matter of their
brain now most people have heard about
gray matter and white matter gray matter
is nerve cell
bodies white matter is nerve cell tracks
so if you think of gray matter is where
the
computation uh is happening in the brain
and white matter are like the
highways and so even a little bit of
alcohol is creating potholes it's
disrupting the
highways in the brain and if if you're
drinking a lot you are prematurely aging
your brain you've scammed a lot of
people who are alcoholics Lots I mean
I've got some scans here and which I'll
put on the screen but can you explain to
me exactly what a brain looks like when
the person has been drinking heavily for
a long period of time so again we do a
study called Spa in Spec looks at blood
flow and activity it looks at how the
brain works and
for people who know the mitochondria
those are the little Powerhouse energy
plants in your cells the spect Tracer
49% of it is taken up by the
mitochondria in the brain so we're also
looking at energy
metabolism and what we see with
alcoholic brains is something we call
scallopine which is This Global
decrease in Act activ it so a healthy
brain full even symmetrical activity it
sort of look big fat and round with
alcohol or other drugs too you see the
brain begin to shrivel and you see it
gets this wavy
appearance and I'm like the real reason
not to drink is it damages your brain so
if you drink then you have a smaller
brain
than you would have otherwise
correct that's pretty scary what does it
why does brain size matter you know when
people say it's going to shrink your
brain why does that matter so I often
say the only organ where size really
does matter is your brain
um because you don't want to
lose brain tissue right there is a part
of your brain called the Hipp canvas
which is on the inside of your temporal
loes right here and it's really
important and um it makes new stem cells
every day about
700 and if you're
drinking it's not allowing those new
stem cells to take hold to take root you
want to strengthen them so they will
continue to support mood
memory um spatial orientation spatial
processing so that's the symptoms you
you're naming there inadvertently
symptoms of someone who has damaged
their hippocampus right so poor memory
probably poor spatial awareness brain
fog and moood and me issues and judgment
and impulse control um but it it impacts
the brain globally so the cerebellum so
they're not going to process as quickly
their decisions are not going to be as
good and
um I worked with my friend BJ fog who
wrote a wonderful book called tiny
habits and he's the um director of
Stanford's persuasive technology lab
which is really on how people people
change and he and I work together cuz
I'm always interested in how I can help
my patients better
um and I met him at a conference like 18
months after we worked together and he
said I just want to thank you I'm like
why he said I wake up 100% every day I'm
like why I stopped
drinking because people with and they're
around me enough they either drink more
I suspect or they stop and isn't that
what you want you wake up
100% every day why would you ever do
anything that
damages stem cell production in your
brain one might argue that it's serving
me in the short term of course but there
are lots of things that like you see you
know let's say you're married but but
you're at a conference and you see this
really cute person and you're like oh
well in the short run that could be
awesome and in the long run you lose
half your net worth and visit your
children on the weekends it's
like that's not a good thing and you
know in the short run you feel more
relaxed right with alcohol you feel more
relaxed and in the long run it increases
your risk of Al Al's disease I'm like
that's not a good tradeoff on your blog
you published a study from 2019 sorry
from 2009 it was a study on monkeys that
showed a decline in new brain cell
development and in that study there was
a 58% decline in new brain cells and a
63% reduction in the survival rate of
new cells from alcohol use they had
monkeys drinking alcohol yes they have
monkeys doing all sorts of things they
shouldn't be doing which is effectively
like pre ual brain
aging right and it's
worse if you do it before your brain is
finished developing and so if you think
of fraternities yeah and surori like I'm
not a fan of sending children away to
college and um is because you have all
these
underdeveloped brains or not fully
developed brains and you put them all
together without appropriate adult
supervision and a lot of bad things
happen at fraternity parties and
sorority parties they're drinking less
though now no they're still drinking it
oh really there's one second and now
they're adding mushroom parties to it so
it's alcohol and psilocybin and
marijuana because everybody thinks
marijuana is innocuous which is a lie
and uh is it m marijuana it's a lie yeah
and I was actually really upset
um so President
Biden during the time he was running for
president so this is
2019 he's on debate stage with a lot of
other people and they asked him if he
would
federally uh legalize marijuana
and he Saidi don't think the science is
decided and no I don't think I would and
Cory Booker the senator from New
Jersey shamed Biden on National
Television he said man are you
high which is just horrifying and I'm
watching this
going the science is actually really
clear marijuana is bad for the brain I
published a study on a thousand
marijuana users every area of their
brain is lower in activity and just
today a study came out in the Journal of
the American Medical Association on a,
21,27 marijuana users um it decreased
activity in the hippocampus that
affected
their memory
centers if you're a teenager and you use
marijuana in your 20s you have a higher
incidence of anxiety depression and
suicide this is not innocuous and we've
been advertised this load of crap which
is oh it's just good medicine and for
some people it is
helpful but let's not say say it's
innocuous because that's a lie and we
are now so many states have legalized
marijuana for recreational use including
here in
California and the Mental Health
crisis is not better if anything it's
dramatically
worse there's two issues here isn't
there there's the impact cannabis has on
the brain and then there's the whole
issue of
legalization and I was re as you was
speaking I was was just looking at some
of the research and it it says exactly
what you said it says that there was a
study published in Jama Network which
examined over a thousand young adults
brains and almost 70% of heavy users
exhibited reduced brain activity during
working memory tasks the decline was
associated with poor poor performance in
retaining and using information
long-term cannabis use has been linked
to smaller hippocampus volume which
again impacts memory and learning so I
mean the science is clear that of what
it's doing but the the question of
legalization is a whole another issue
well please don't put people who use
marijuana in jail yeah like that's just
a bad use of money yeah that that's not
smart but the the problem becomes we're
not educating kids on the potential
damage to brain development which nobody
really argues
about nobody's really nobody reputable I
know of is going yeah give it to
teenagers and let them smoke all they
want no it's just dumb so I it's a
bigger question and I think the
answer I have a high school course
in um it's called brain Thrive by 25 and
we actually studied it in 16 schools
decreases drug alcohol and tobacco use
decreases depression and improves
self-esteem why we teach kids to love
and care for their brain you got your
brain scan and now you love love your
brain more you you want it to be better
that's the answer it's not scanning
everybody it's educating everybody your
brain controls everything you do and
when it works right you work right and
when it doesn't you
don't so let's love it and let's learn
together how to optimize it but the big
innovation Stephen for 2025 in
psychiatry marijuana psilocybin and
ketamine the street drugs of the 60s are
coming back and I'm
like I feel like I'm living in this
insane world where we're not talking
about you should eat better and exercise
and learn not to believe every stupid
thing you think and meditation could
calm your mind probably more effectively
than alcohol or marijuana it's not hard
to learn what's wrong with cocy in magic
mushrooms yeah everybody's so excited
about micro doing and it's a treatment
for depression and I think I've seen
this story before so in the early
80s benzos you know like Xanax and
clopen and Adavan they were Mommy's
Little Helper and this will really help
your anxiety the problem is they make
your brain look older than you are and
they're addictive as hell then there was
alcohol is a health food marijuana is
innocuous pain is the fifth Vital sign
which led to the opiate epidemic and now
we're into
mushrooms psilocybin Associated
psychosis has gone up
300% in the last couple of years that
not for everybody but for some
vulnerable people and we don't know who
they are
it can flip them into a psychotic
episode I'm like we need to be careful
we need to be
thoughtful so psilocybin hasn't yet been
legalized in the US in Oregon oh it has
been in Oregon
um is it being delivered yet in Oregon
in a theraputic just now is it so it
there was a 2-year waiting period yeah
and they were training uh people to do
psilocybin assisted psychotherapy but
there isn't a psilocybin compound that's
been approved yet by the FDA so there's
still I think it's stage three clinical
trials from what I understand I was
quite involved in that world as an
investor once upon a time so I
understand the like rigor to get these
compounds clinically approved and you're
right so in the early like clinical
trials there's I mean groups of like 20
people in some of the early clinical
trials and as they're progressing now I
I think getting to stage three they need
to have bigger sample sizes and make
sure that these compounds are safe and
from what I've seen a lot of people are
trying to get it approved in a clinical
setting for CA cases of treatment
resistant depression where you do see
even in those the studies that I've read
you see some people have adverse
responses so some people get worse and
there's you know if you take a someone
who's treatment resistant depressed and
potentially suicidal and you give them a
a a strong compound like of sideon some
people can get worse but for the ones
that get better it's pretty remarkable
it's like I've been I remember the first
study that I read I think coming out of
the L uh one of the London universities
that's really leading on this maybe
Imperial College London or something and
it said something like 30% of people
that did one dose of celoc cybin
were went into clinical remission after
12 weeks after one dose and there's
really like nothing else that I can
think of that can deliver that kind of
response in that period of time K
ketamine ketamine I mean MDMA has I
think been ketamine can do it but then
ketamine can also be addictive and can
be
problematic so I'm like well why
wouldn't we scan them
first and then try to figure out why
you're depressed CU if you think about
it
depression is like chest
pain and nobody gets a diagnosis of
chest pain why it doesn't tell you
what's causing it and it doesn't tell
you what to do for
it all sorts of things can cause chest
pain right from a heart attack a heart
arhythmia a heart
infection gas an ulcer grief all of
those can cause chest pain well there's
a whole bunch of things that can cause
depression like loss negative thinking
low thyroid having a head injury um
being exposed to mold or Mercury
blad it's like if you don't look if you
just give everybody you're depressed
based on these nine symptoms and now we
go give everybody an SSRI which is
ludicrous because that's assuming
everybody with it's sort of like giving
everybody with chest pain
nitroglycerin
which is
stupid right you would never give
everybody who has chest pain one
treatment you'd go I have to Target the
treatment to the cause but if you never
look
you have no idea so for example I was on
the
Kardashians and so it's public that um I
saw Kendall and I saw her for postco
anxiety her brain was on fire from covid
and a lot of people don't understand
that covid and other infections can
cause
inflammation in the brain well that's
not a
psilocybon thing that's an
anti-inflammatory cocktail to help
postco anxiety or postco depression if
you don't look you don't know you end up
Flying
Blind and that's what I'm in fighting
with my colleagues for the last 33 years
it's how do you know unless you look and
what other Medical Specialists never
look at the organ they so we could talk
about oh I've seen these amazing
results and I think we should see well
what's this scan
pattern that you're going to respond to
psilocybin or Lexapro or ketamine or
lctl right I mean it's great we have all
these treatments but let's not fly
[Music]
blind when we don't have to there's this
graph I saw the other day circulating
around the internet which I'm going to
show you and I'll put it on the screen
for anybody that can't see it but it
shows globally which countries
distribute the most anti-depressant
pills
ssris and the United States leads the
way by a long margin I mean I think in
in looking at that graph it's almost 10
times more anti-depressant pills per
person are handed out in the United
States than other parts of the
world and I wondered why why does the
USA
hand out anti-depressant pills
like like their water or
something it's such an interesting graph
um because here in America we want the
fast answer I don't feel well fix me
and what doctors have do you know 85% of
psychiatric drugs in America are
prescribed by non- psychiatric
physicians in 7-minute office visits
that do standard of care
12% of the time what does that mean and
that they do what most doctors would
consider good medicine 12% of the time
so you go to your family doctor or your
nurse practitioner and you go I'm sad
I'm anxious I'm not sleeping you might
and we hear this all the time at clinics
I have 11 clinics around the United
States we hear it all the time that I
went to my doctor and he gave me a
prescription for Lexapro Xanax and
ambian and it just blows my mind that
they would put you on something that
changes your brain to need them in order
for you to feel normal see people don't
understand and I am not opposed to
medication I use it when I think I need
to but let's be clear they do not heal
fix anything what they do is they
suppress symptoms but then once they've
suppressed the symptoms they've changed
your brain so you need them in order to
feel
okay I don't like that like what can I
do naturally
head-to-head against anti-depressants
saffron has been shown to be equally
effective the spice
saffron head-to-head against
anti-depressants walking like you're
late 45 minutes four times a week
equally effective head-to-head against
anti-depressants taking omega-3 fatty
acids equally effective in a study from
Australia head-to-head against
anti-depressants learning how to not
believe believe every stupid thing you
think has been shown to be equally
effective so why not if you're depressed
and you can't get
scanned start
walking take omega-3 fatty acids and
saffron and learn how to kill the ants
ants stands for automatic negative
thoughts the thoughts that come into
your mind automatically and ruin your
day and we grow up I don't know if the
same thing is in
England there's no training on how to
manage your
mind right I was 28 years old in my
psychiatric residency when one of my
professors said you have to teach your
patients not to believe every stupid
thing they think and I'm
28 and I'm in my residency which means I
finished College I finished medical
school and I believe every stupid thing
I think that no one had ever taught me
how to manage my own thoughts I can't
believe that thing you just said about
saffron I was reading about it here it
says Research indicates that saffron may
be as effective as ssris in treating
mild and moderate depression and a
metaanalysis of eight studies found no
difference between saffron and ssris in
reducing depressive symptoms but in fact
the side of effect profile is probably
better for
saffron well so I got interested in
Saffron about 25 years ago because I saw
a study so there are now
25 randomized controlled trials showing
that saffron is as
effective as ssris and other
anti-depressants but the thing that
caught my interest this may speak more
about me is they didn't decrease sexual
function in fact they enhanced it and so
I've been a psychiatrist a long time and
ssris for the right brain they work but
they make it harder to have an orgasm
they decrease your
libido and I don't like that I don't
want to separate if you're depressed
you're already separated from your
partner yeah if you're depressed and you
can't have an orgasm or you're not
interested that's
damaging not only to you but it damages
your partner and so and I thought
saffron can enhance sexual function and
I'm like okay I'm paying attention and
so I have collected every study ever
published on saffron and brain and
mental health there's actually five
studies showing en hance's memory that
it was as good as AOSP in people AOSP a
medicine we use in Alzheimer's disease
and it's as good as AOSP so it helps
memory it helps mood it helps sexual
function I'm like mood memory and sex
I'm going to take it mood memory and sex
so yeah i' love
saffron so why wouldn't we start with
that and exercise and learn to manage
your mind rather than start with Lexapro
or even soloc cybin or ketamine one of
the things when people are talking about
psychedelics that they're trying to
treat is trauma right Early Childhood
trauma um is that something that you can
see if you looked at my brain could you
see trauma on my brain yes and have you
looked a diamond pattern that I've
written about I published in actually
discover magazine in 2016 listed my
study so I published a study on 21,000
people showing we could separate
post-traumatic stress disorder from
traumatic brain injury with high levels
of accuracy and then we repeated this
study on soldiers and showed the same
thing and this year I just published the
world's largest study on childhood
trauma so do you know the a score yes
which is a measure of childhood trauma
childhood trauma adverse childhood
experiences so it's on a scale of 0 to
10 how many bad things happen to you as
a child physical emotional sexual abuse
neglect um being being raised with
parent that has a mental illness that's
incarcerated addiction
watching um your mother be abused so
domestic violence so 0 to 10 I'm a one
my wife's an eight we adopted our two
nieces who are both nines and so I'm
very interested in childhood trauma so
so a nine is good or bad nine is
terrible okay so higher the number so
zero is means you have none of those
okay
a you have a
lot and we if you have four or
more you have an increased risk of seven
of the top 10 leading causes of
death if you have six or more so my
wife's in eight my nieces are nines you
die 20 years earlier than the general
population and in our study what we
showed the more Aces you had the more
activation of your limbic structures
especially a very interesting
area called the anterior singular gyus I
think of this as the brain's gear
shifter lets you go from thought to
thought move from idea to idea be
flexible go with the flow and when this
is overactive
people worry they hold on to things it's
like the trauma is always in front of
them and I often do timeline I ask
people do you see your
life um going from left to
right or from front to
back and I see the past behind me my
wife sees the past in front of her and
that's often what you see with
trauma and their brain becomes
overactive in their emotional brain
which makes them at higher risk for pain
syndromes
um higher risk for anxiety higher risk
for depression higher risk for insomnia
that they're sort of always looking for
bad things to happen is there anything
someone can do at
home because you know not everybody can
afford to go to a therapist it's hard to
get access to these kind of treatments
if if I have some kind of Trapped trauma
or traumatic experienc PTSD that I've
been through and I don't have any money
at all it what would you recommend for
me well I mean the first thing I want
everyone to do is love their brain right
the healthier your
brain and before we we started we talked
about this idea it's the brain you bring
in into trauma that often determines how
you deal with it and to get well you
have to get your brain
healthy so that's the first thing so
that means getting off the alcohol
exercise eat well certain simple
supplements yes what supplements and
then um multiple vitamin for basic
nutrition know your vitamin D level and
optimize it and most people need to
supplement
vitamin D and if you have darker
skin you need five times the level of
Sun as someone from northern Europe to
get a healthy vitamin D level so you
should know your vitamin D level and
optimize it like I always say can't
change what you don't measure and
vitamin D is a very important number to
know so multiple vitamin vitamin D
omega-3 fatty acid I did a
study 50 consecutive patient Stam in
clinics who are not taking vitamin D we
measured their omega-3 index 49 were
suboptimal and so I think most people
would benefit from an omega-3 fatty acid
supplement and then it's sort of depends
if you have issues with your mood
saffron would be great if you tend to be
anxious don't go for the benzo um
theanine ashwagandha magnesium Gaba
diaphragmatic breathing hypnosis so many
things to help anxiety before you ever
go to something that's addictive that
makes your brain look older than you are
that increases your risk of
dementia one of the really really
interesting things that you mentioned
which I had never heard of or thought
thought of before is the impact of
negative thinking on your brain we just
published this huge study on negativity
bias and it's not good for your frontal
loes and so I love doing positivity
biased training like I train all of my
patients start every day today is going
to be a great day I
mean somebody asked me today if I
believe in
manifestation um part of I think you
have to tell your brain what you want
and then your brain will figure out how
to get it and so if you go today is
going to be a great day your brain
starts looking like why is today going
to be a great day and when you go to bed
at night what went well today that's so
helpful to just start programming your
brain to look for what's right not just
for what's wrong virtually every
depressed patient I said have a high
negativity bias and so training them to
be more positive now not
irrationally
positive because you need some anxiety
people have low levels of anxiety die
early from accidents and preventable
illnesses people who have low levels of
anxiety low levels of anxiety so I
always I have an older brother who I
love um
but he's one of the don't worry be happy
people and I sort of always wanted to be
like him because I'm much more serious
much more driven and I'm like no I
wanted to be like him until I read the
research the people who live the longest
so there's a study from Stanford they
started in
1921 and they looked at
1548 10-year-old children
and they were looking for what goes with
success Health and
Longevity and what they found was
shocking the don't worry be happy people
died the earliest from accidents and
preventable illnesses the people who
live the
longest the one theme was they were
conscientious if they said they were
going to show up
and they showed up reliably consistently
they live longer than everyone else and
I just shows they had good frontal
function it's like if I say I'm going to
do something and I commit to it I do it
you live longer could that be also
linked to like discipline those people
are more likely to be disciplined with
other areas of their life habits eating
gym yes which means they had better
frontal lob function so why would we
ever take these guys fernal loes offline
no love your fernal loses this is why
when you have children don't let them
hit soccer balls with their forehead
it's just not a smart thing to do I
think that's probably a big thing people
are thinking about this time of the year
so we're recording now in January 2025
wow um and everybody's thinking about
new year new me they're thinking about
their New Year's resolution becoming a
new person habits motivation discipline
these are like the trifactor of what I I
see people talking about the most at
this time of year when you with
everything you understand about the
brain how do I become a more disciplined
motivated person who has better habits
so one you take care of your brain and
two you know when relapse happens
relapse happens when you don't sleep
okay
when you've gone too long without eating
when blood sugar levels go low relapse
happens you start making bad
decisions when if you're a female when
you're in the last week of your cycle
because blood flow to your frontal lobe
drops for many women so I have five
sisters and five daughters I completely
believe in PMs
and I've scanned people best time of
their cycle worst time it's like they're
two different people sort of like they
have multiple personality disorder
because their brain is just so different
now obviously not with all women but for
certain ones it's a big issue and if the
ants are taken over so if the automatic
negative thoughts which also tend to go
up if you haven't slept if you've gone
too long without eating if you're at
that time of your cycle or you're under
chronic stress or you're drinking or
using other drugs so you might suppress
them but then they come back and they
attack you so then you have to suppress
them again and this is how
addiction starts so is it fair to say
that if you're trying to change who you
are and you're trying to establish a new
habit or crack motivation then the goal
shouldn't be necessarily to get a
six-pack it should probably be something
further Upstream like sleep well or
better frontales and so how do I get
better frontales and it's three
strategies frontal lobe Envy right brain
Envy got to care about it avoid things
that hurt damaging my frontal
loes and do things that strengthen my
frontal loes we talked about two of
these points earlier but you we talked
about alcohol but in the context of
sleep I've heard on you I think it was
in your podcast change your brain after
two drinks your REM sleep drops to
roughly an hour after four drinks your
REM sleep drops to 30 minutes and after
six drinks your REM sleep drops to less
than 2 minutes for many people um
obviously these aren't specific numbers
because everybody's brain is
different but it just goes to show I
guess the relative drop in REM sleep
which is your restorative sleep based on
alcohol consumption and so if I drink
I'm not going to sleep while I'm not
going to get restorative sleep I wake up
the next day I'm going to struggle more
with motivation and keeping any habit
that I have ending anxiety and then
you're going to be more
ants and then you're going to drink more
to shut up the ants and then when they
come back they come back stronger and by
ants you mean the automatic negative
thoughts okay the chatter that hurts you
and we talked about how to kill them so
whenever you feel sad or mad or nervous
or out of control what I want you to do
is just write it down and then ask
yourself a series of
questions um and I have I have this cute
diagram of the different types of ants
and I always ask my patients so which
which are your ants are they like All or
Nothing ants were you thinking words
like always never everyone every time
are they less than ants given to us by
social media uh where we compare
ourselves others in a negative way guilt
beating ants mind reading ants fortune
telling ants blame
ants um so identify the type do you have
a example of a bad thought that just
sort of runs around your head oh
gosh um I think I live in a permanent
state of assuming I'm going to get bad
bad news and it doesn't haunt me I think
I'm generally quite calm person and
quite focused and peaceful in my brain
but I think because I've ran companies
for the last 10 years or longer you're
always just about to get bad news so I
think that can be that can be playing on
the radio in the background somewhere
like I'm GNA open an email and it's
going to be bad news there's so many
opportunities for bad news in my world
so yeah yeah so I think you write it
down this is going to be bad and then my
friend Byron Katie has has this process
that I've refined a bit so that's a
fortune telling amp right and so this is
going to be bad news or I always get bad
news fortune telling and all or
nothing and so the first question is is
it
true right the second question is it
absolutely true with 100% certainty and
if one is no two is automatically no the
third question question is how does that
thought Make Me
Feel on edge on edge how does the
thought make me act so the third
question has three parts how does the
thought make me feel tense on edge how
does it make me
act uh removed uh what's that word is it
apathetic reticent yeah yeah and the
third part of that what's the outcome of
believing it's always is going to be
bad
news I mean there's no good outcome
really suffering yeah suffering yeah the
fourth question is how would you feel if
you didn't have that thought free and
how would you
act uh happier and
uh more present and the outcome of not
having that thought better relationships
because you're more present yeah yeah
and then the fifth question so the first
one is is it true the second one is it
absolutely true the third one how would
I how do I feel act and what's the
outcome of having this thought the
fourth question is how would I feel act
and what's the outcome of not having the
thought the fifth question is my
favorite just take the thought and turn
it to the
opposite and then ask yourself is that
true
so it's going to be good
news or it's going to be innocuous
news and then go yeah 99 times out of
100 that's
true and then I would because I'm also a
CEO I'm like well how many of these
things can't I handle
virtually none of them I can handle all
of them
right so I'll be okay and then I
meditate on the opposite of the thought
that's bothering me and so I take these
thoughts
captive I like that and people who are
depressed are
infested with negativity
but you can train that your brain is
healthy it's easier to do you can train
that but you imagine there's no second
grade class in the
world where teachers teach children not
to believe every stupid thing they think
in fact I was watching one of the
confirmation hearings today and the
senators were filled with ants oh yeah
they were distorted things they were
angry they were making things more
negative than they needed to be we are
model bad
thinking and the News does it
purposefully because they know if they
piss you off if they scare you you're
going to tune in so they can sell you
more copper underwear so we're in a
society that breeds these
ant attacks
so you have to be careful people who
watch the news in the morning are 27%
less happy in the afternoon and so you
have to guard what goes
in so every day your programming
happiness or
sadness and I
believe Dennis Prager has this great
five minute video called why be happy
and I love it so much I wrote a book
called you happier
and I start with his idea that happiness
is a moral obligation and I'm like so I
grew up not too far from here I went to
Catholic School my mom was very serious
about being
Catholic and growing up the idea
happiness is a moral obligation was
nowhere in my childhood and I had a good
childhood why is it a moral obligation
because of how you impact other
people if you were raised by an unhappy
parent or married to an unhappy spouse
or raising an unhappy child and you ask
those people is happiness an ethical
issue they would all say
yes so is it wrong to program your mind
to look for what's right
it's hard for some people it's just a
pattern right it's like getting biceps
are
hard but it's it's not right it's just
repeatedly doing the same thing that
gives you the desire you want have you
seen someone shift from being a
stereotypically negative person down and
out negative depressed to the opposite
yes truly the opposite a lot
but you got to do the
process it's you you got to do the
work when you love yourself you do the
work like I come from a family of fat
people but I'm not why because I know
it's a risk for me and so every day of
my life I'm on an obesity prevention
plan and wish I didn't have to be right
I wish I could just eat anything I want
and it would be okay but it's not the
reality of my life do you own a business
or do you work in marketing if that's
you listen up for a valuable opportunity
from our show sponsor LinkedIn I'm an
invested in about 40 odd companies and
while they operate in different
Industries they all face one challenge
maybe the most important challenge when
it comes to marketing getting their
brand in front of the right audiences we
can probably all think of times when
we've been scrolling on social media and
received an ad that absolutely wasn't
relevant to us LinkedIn has now grown to
a network of over a billion
professionals including 130 million
decision makers which means you can
specifically Target your buyers by job
title seniority industry even company
Revenue so stop wasting your marketing
Budget on the wrong audience and start
targeting the right crowd through
Linkedin now and because you're part of
my community LinkedIn is offering you a
$100 credit for your next campaign head
to linkedin.com diary to claim yours now
that's linkedin.com diary and of course
terms and conditions apply and only
available on LinkedIn ads now for people
that don't know who Elizabeth Smart is
who is she and what did you learn from
scanning her
brain so Elizabeth is someone who made
really international news many years ago
she was kidnapped when she was a
teenager and virtually raped every day
for nine months and then she was
found um that she was actually very
smart and she manipulated her kidnappers
to bring her back to Utah Salt Lake city
where the kidnapped her from and she was
found by the police and one would think
she would have severe lasting
post-traumatic stress disorder
and I was very interested to scan her
and be helpful to her she in fact did
not have post-traumatic stress disorder
she had post-traumatic growth she took
her
trauma and made
something special out of it where she
actually runs an organization for women
who have been
abused um and I just remember sitting
there and her brain was actually quite
healthy I think she helped me more than
I helped her just so
fascinated by how she could take
something that's truly
horrifying and come out of
it and be quite okay and she's how old
now she's in she's in her in 30s and
she's in a relationship married she's
married she has children she's running
an organization she speaks around the
country I mean when people hear that
they might begin to
question how they think about trauma
because we think of trauma as a very
deterministic thing I if that happens to
you I can predict that you're going to
be X you're going to be you know maybe
depressed you're not going to be social
functioning you're probably not going to
have functional good relationships
that's the kind of thing we think when
we hear about such a horrific event we
kind of see it as deterministic of who
you then become but she's proving that
that that's not the case now in fact of
people who go through something really
terrible about 10% of people will
develop
PTSD and about 10% of people will
develop post-traumatic growth and most
people sort of land in the middle I
wrote an
article 1982 when I was a resident at
Walter Reed
um called post Vietnam stress disorder a
metaphor for current and past life
events and it was when I was resident I
got the idea it's the brain you bring
into Vietnam that often determines the
brain that comes out of Vietnam that if
you grew up in an alcoholic home or you
grew up with a lot of stress you are
much more likely to become a heroin
addict and much more likely to come home
and
struggle um obviously not
always but we should there's a concept
since I started Imaging that I just
dearly love so much called brain Reserve
so brain Reserve is the extra tissue you
have to deal with whatever stress comes
your
way and brain Reserve actually
starts before you were conceived so you
get your brain wrapped around that a
little bit it's the idea of
epigenetics that if your parents grew up
in trauma and
abuse it changed their genes
to make you more
[Music]
vulnerable
and if so your genetic history
matters the health of your mom while
she's carrying
you your brain starts to develop three
weeks after she gets pregnant three
weeks like about day
21 and so her stress level her
infectious disease level burden her
nutrition her
sleep all of these things matter one of
my patients wife is pregnant I'm like
you need to be nice to her you need to
like lower her stress because you a
child that this has
generational
consequences and then when you're born
how did the birth go and then as a child
what was your nutrition link what were
your stress levels like did you play
football did you fall off the
swing all of those things are either
building your brain Reserve or
stealing your brain Reserve so when
you get
kidnapped or let's just take two
soldiers and War they're in the same
tank they go over an IED so they're both
the tank is blown
up one walks away
unharmed the other one's permanently
disabled why it's their brain reserve
the brain they brought into the
explosion often
determines how they are so I
argue we should always be
building
reserve and I turned 70 this year and I
know 50% of people 85 and older have
Alzheimer's disease one and two
horrifying statistics and so I know that
so between now and 15 years from now
what are the things I can do
to build my Reserve so the gravity of
age has less impact on me because your
brain is going to shrink with aging
regardless of any it it's going to show
although I have a whole group of super
brains people that are 80 90 1005 like
stunningly beautiful brains but they're
people that had stunningly beautiful
brain Reserve habits okay that they
didn't smoke they weren't drinkers they
ate well they were not overweight so on
this subject of Alzheimer's it's
increasing globally the I reading
something I think from like the
Alzheimer's Association that said
they're predicting by 2050 that there's
going to be 150 or 160 million people
globally that have Alzheimer's disease
there's still a lot of question marks
around what causes it what increases its
probability Etc but what do you think
the cause of Outsiders is I think there
are many causes of it and the going
wisdom until recently was excessive beta
ameloid pla
formation caused Alzheimer's and there's
a lot of questions around that
theory I think uh I have a pneumonic I
like called bright Minds you want to
keep your brain healthy or rescue it you
have to prevent or treat the 11 major
risk factors so I think there are in
fact many roads to Alzheimer's disease
and people go what the difference
between Alzheimer's and Dementia
dementia is the umbrella category you
start losing your faculties Alzheimer's
is one of the types but the more you get
into it you realize it's a pretty mixed
bag and so
um bright
Minds blood flow retirement and aging
inflammation genetics head trauma toxins
mental health you know if a woman is
depressed it doubles her risk of
Alzheimer's disease if a man is
depressed it quadruples his risk of
Alzheimer's and then the sleeper in all
of these is infections immunity and
infections many of of us think it's a
major one of the major causes of
Alzheimer's disease in fact there's a
new study out on covid people who had
covid had an significantly increased
risk of getting Alzheimer's disease and
then neuro hormones and we have this
epidemic of low testosterone in young
males now um
diabesity and sleep diabet is you either
have high blood
sugar and or you're overweight and that
one risk
factor if you have that one risk factor
now all of a sudden you have 10 of the
11 risk factors because if you have one
if you have diabetes if you're
overweight or you have high blood sugar
it lowers blood flow to your brain it
prematurely ages your brain it increases
is inflammation fat cells produce
something called adapin which is
inflammatory molecules it changes your
genetics fat stores toxins you're more
likely to be depressed you're it damages
your
immunity um takes healthy testosterone
turns it into unhealthy cancer promoting
forms of estrogen and impairs your sleep
om justly and then people go oh but
you're fat shaming and it's like
no I published a study on
33,000 people as your weight goes up the
size and function of the brain goes down
somebody's got to like say the truth the
truth is being at an unhealthy weight is
unhealthy for your brain and body I was
reading a some studies earlier on when I
spoke to a insulin resistance expert one
of the things said to me was that they
now almost describe Alzheimer's as type
3 diabetes that's a phrase that's often
used and when they look at brains that
are insulin resistant the person between
40 or 80% of the time depending on which
studies you look at has insulin
resistance I.E they've had elevated
blood sugar levels which have caused an
insulin resistance or something else it
could be stress that causes insulin
resistance or many other things but it's
interesting to think of to think of as
you said that that one one thing which
is the high blood sugar levels insulin
resistance can have such a profound
impact on the brain and if I've ever
heard a case for being a bit more
careful about
sugar and other things that will Spike
my blood sugar levels and chronically I
think that's probably it you know
because your brain as you said at the
start of this conversation drives
everything in your life and to think
that Sugar an overc consumption of sugar
should I say has such a profound impact
on the brain is is pause for
me because I don't like sugar that
much um you don't like it as much as you
like your brain yeah and my life so
there's a study from the Mayo Clinic
where they looked at people who had
primarily a fat-based diet so
fish healthy
oils avocados nuts and seeds they had
42% less risk of getting Alzheimer's
disease and then they looked at people
who had primarily a protein based diet
so think of a caveman diet 21% less risk
of getting Alzheimer's disease and then
they looked at people that had a
standard American diet simple
carbohydrate based diet bread pasta
potatoes rice fruit juice sugar a 4 100%
increased risk of getting Alzheimer's
disease it's the sugar and the foods
that quickly turn to sugar which goes
with the
insulin Diabetes Type 3
hypothesis you have to manage it and the
reason this is so important to me
is having high blood sugar makes your
blood vessel
brittle and more likely to break which
means it takes longer for things to
heal and you're more likely to have a
stroke and having a stroke increases
your risk of Alzheimer's
tfold so you a fan of the keto diet I
sound like for some people I I I find
that it doesn't have enough plants m in
it
which means it's probably not going to
be awesome for your
microbiome so I'm more a fan of a paleo
diet that has healthy fat healthy
protein and lots of plants MH we've
covered so much there's uh the one thing
we talk we started talking about briefly
I think before we started recording was
the subject of Hope and grief I've never
heard someone talk about the impact that
grief has on the brain brain when we
lose someone when we're going through
prolonged pain because of a
loss oh I know more about this than I
want it
activates the limic or emotional
circuits in the brain and so when you
lose someone important to you or even a
pet like I hadry
a white shepher and so beautiful and so
sweet and he got cancer and when he died
he still lives in my
head and I lost someone important to me
about 20 years ago and for like a year I
was just not okay and so I scanned
myself and my emotional brain was so
busy and it's like when you have someone
they actually become
ingrained in every fun place in your
brain so they get stored in multiple
places in your brain and when they're
not there anymore your brain still looks
for
them and figuring out ways to sort of
calm down your emotional brain can be so
help so
helpful what part of the brain is that
is that the amydala no it's more the
insular cortex and the
thalamus and that's what we found with
depression I published a study with
Scientists from USC and Los Angeles
Children's Hospital on depression and
what we found those were the structures
that were dramatically
overactive compared to people who were
not depressed so in grief the prefrontal
cortex assuming because that's the more
rational part of the brain that's
probably going to be quieter right what
do I and so it's the pre fernal cortex
you bring in to the loss that often
determines how you deal with it okay and
so your emotional brain fires up if
you're drinking and taking the
prefrontal cortex offline it can't
manage it so one thing people don't
understand is the fibers from the preal
cortex to the rest of the brain are
inhibitory which means they calm things
down so if this isn't working right the
emotional part can sort of override it
and it becomes problematic IC
um and so protecting this is so
important to managing so much of your
life I mean it's really the human most
human thoughtful part of
us and what we found within Hope was the
insular cortex was low it's
really interesting to us and hope is
tomorrow can be better and I have a part
in it when you're hopeless you don't
believe you have
agency to make tomorrow
better and so often there are hope
training courses that can be good and I
with all of my patients I do this
exercise called the onepage miracle I
referred to earlier it's like write down
what do you want relationships work
money physical emotional spiritual
health all these things write it down
and so talked earlier about we're
recording this in January I have all my
patients do it when I first see them and
then every January for sure and then you
just ask yourself does my behavior get
me what I
want but but it starts with or what do
you want you have to write it down like
with my
wife I'm very
clear I want a kind caring loving
supportive passionate
relationship always want that don't
always feel like that got these rude
thoughts that show up or conflicting
ideas that'll just show up in my head
and I'm like oh no
don't say that no don't do that because
it doesn't
fit and it's been the best relationship
of my life because both of us have the
same goals and we're pretty good at
matching our Behavior to the
goal and as a CEO right what do you do
with companies you have a business
plan and then you have regular meetings
and key perform indicators to like go
how are we doing and if we're not doing
great we change but it always starts
with plan and most individuals never
have a plan so they're kind of just
being dragged around by whatever I mean
and now in social media it's very
dangerous because you might want what
the Kardashians have and it's like wait
a
minute relationships work money physical
emotional spiritual health and then if I
had tattoos I don't
yet my wife got one that freaked me
out it's my daughter's birthday
but the tattoo would be does it
fit know what you want and then ask
yourself every day my behavior get me
what I want and some people go well
isn't that
selfish it's like absolutely not cuz if
I'm
good I'm good for everyone around me
your goal could be to be a great father
it absolutely should be a great father
it's to be a loving husband kind caring
loving supported
passionate it's oh by the way when
people do our program their erections
are better just saying because blood
flow is
better when brain health is better CU
your brain uses 20% of the blood flow in
your body and so if you're working to
have a healthy
brain everything works better J say why
did that come to mind when I asked about
your goals well because I went
passionate and I'm like
okay you have to be clear
um and or even think about work you know
what's the goal with work it's to do
meaningful work it's to to make a
difference I am you're a father I'm not
a father yet but I hope to be um I've
got three little nieces my brothers had
three three two little nieces and one
nephew my brother's a year older than me
and he's had three kids already so I've
got some catching up to do but as I'm
progressing towards this season of life
one of the things I think about having
met you is how to raise healthy brains
like what parenting style is going to
make sure that my kids have very healthy
brains there's so much conversation
about parenting stuff
um some people say just let them do
whatever they want to do some people say
be an authoritarian and put rules in
place I'm wondering from the perspective
of someone who scanned 260,000 brains
how do you raise a perfect brain well
one you get rid of the idea that you're
going to raise a perfect brain okay
because there's a little OCD in there
um the first thing you do is you have
goals for yourself what kind of parent
do you want to be and what kind of child
do you want to
raise and for me I want to be
present kind and
effective and for my kids I want them to
be
mentally strong and resilient and I want
them to feel good about themselves and
then you bond with them you want to be a
good dad
bonding requires two things time actual
physical
time and
listening so time have an exercise I
love so much called special time 20
minutes a day do something with your
child that your child wants to do and
during that time no commands no
questions no directions just time to
bond the most important thing to
Children is time with their parents and
people are
busy doesn't have to be a lot but if you
do that 20 minutes a
day it's money in the
relational
bank so my first literary
agent I think he was 42 when he had his
first child and he's
like my daughter she's to Laura never
wants to be with me I come home she
completely ignores me she just wants her
mother she wants nothing to do with me
that's because she's a girl right like
absolutely not Carl you're ignoring her
what do you mean I'm ignoring her I said
you're ignoring her do this and I told
him about special time and he's like
that won't work I'm like negativity
bias I'm like oh great you represent an
idiot you represent me and you're
telling me it won't work I said do this
it works and I'm going to call you in
three weeks so I wrote them in my
appointment book we had appointment
books then and three weeks later I
called him Carl it's Daniel Daniel she
won't leave me alone all she wants to do
is be with me as soon as I get home she
grabs my leg and wants her time I'm like
I told you it
works it works time actual physical time
and then
shut up listen this is so important
parents are awful at listening you've
heard of active listening yeah so active
listen it's like so simple child says
something before you give your two
cents just repeat it back and sort of
listen to the feelings behind the
words I want to have blue hair I know
what my dad would have said
want I have blue hair no way in hell as
long as you live in my house you can
have a blue hair but what does that do
it just shuts down the conversation or
starts a fight like oh you want to have
blue hair and then just be
quiet and then the child might say
everyone's doing
that my dad would say I don't care what
anyone else is doing as long as you live
in this house you're not going to have
blue hair if they're going to jump off a
cliff or you're going to go with them
not
helpful sounds like you want to be like
the other
kids and then he might say sometimes I
feel like I don't fit
in which is really the conversation you
want to
have and my mother would have said of
course you fit in you're a good boy
you're a good-look boy said and that's
not helpful either it's just helpful to
listen if you have time and you have
listening you
Bond and then the kids tell to pick your
values because they're
bonded and then when they make a mistake
don't rescue
them today parents do way too much for
their
children and they steal their
self-esteem I often say if you do too
much for your kids you build your
self-esteem by stealing
theirs and you're going to be tempted
because you're going to have such love
for
them you don't want them to
hurt and that's a
mistake because
character is built through
struggle character and self-esteem are
built by feeling
competent you can solve problems so when
a child says um
bored rather than well we could do this
or we could do that or we could do
this
go I wonder what you're going to do
about in terms of their diet and
lifestyle am I right in thinking it's
it's pretty obvious here
sugar chemicals toxins these kinds of
things are really really bad for the
child's bre is there anything
non-obvious
that we do to our children's brains well
I think the most important thing is you
model OKAY the message so what you do
and there's a reason that all of
the
sugar poison cereals are on the bottom
two
aisles or the bottom two rows on because
that's where children can see them and
they're like Mommy I want this and
I always want you to remember this Rule
and I want you to consider sharing it
with your
children if you have a tantrum to get
your way the answer is no it's always
going to be no go for
it I'm dead
serious
we teach
people how to treat us by what we
tolerate we train children to be bad by
what we pay attention
to so I think that's always been a very
effective rule for me if you have a fit
the answer is no it's always going to be
no and I'm not going to be phased if you
do but what if they do it in a
store it's like you want long-term pain
or short-term pain short-term pain is
not given into the
Tantrum and there' probably be a
consequence when you come home for
acting like that um so are you saying to
ignore the
tension it's like I'm not giving in like
have fun with
it I am not giving in we're at a
friend's house and you have a fit well
one there's going to be a
consequence uh when you come home I
don't know what it is but I'm going to
think about it it's such a great line
that in my book raising mentally strong
kids kids we we have lots of great lines
for parents and it's I don't know what
the consequence is but I'm going to
think about it just to increase their
anxiety about it uh because we want them
thinking about their behavior and like
in life their consequences to bad
behavior we want them to think about
what that might be
might that stray into neglect when they
get they express their emotions though
for example if my kid is in a
supermarket and screaming and crying
Daddy give me this and I just always
ignore them are they going to be raised
to be like neglected children or
something well if you do it in the
context of special time an active
listening and I think rules are
important um like tell the truth put
away things that you take out we treat
each other with respect um do what I ask
the first time it's one of my favorite
rules
um it prevents the kids from like going
on and on
about being
oppositional
um there's no way they're going to feel
like you're not listening and you're
ignoring
them but if they're acting
inappropriately you you want
one not give into it and to have a
significant conversation and consequence
for I've invested more than a million
pounds into this company Perfect Ted and
they're also a sponsor of this podcast I
switched over to using matcher as my
dominant energy source and that's where
perfect Ted comes in they have the
matcha powders they have the matcha
drinks they have the pods and all of
this keeps me focused throughout a very
very long recording day no matter what's
going on and their team is obsessed with
quality which is why they Source their
ceremonial grade matcha from Japan so
when people say to me that they don't
like the taste of matcha I'm guessing
that they haven't tried perfect head
unlike lowquality matcher that has a
bitter grassy taste perfect headed is
smooth and naturally sweet and without
knowing it you're probably a perfect
headed customer already if you're
getting your match at places like blank
Street or Joe and the juice but now you
can make it yourself at home so give it
a try and we'll see if you still don't
like matcha so here's what I'm going to
do I'm going to give you 40% off our
matcher if you try it today head to
perfect ted.com and use code steven4 or
if you're in a supermarket you can get
it at tesos or Holland and Barrett or in
the Netherlands at Albert Hein and those
of you in the US you can get it on
Amazon one of the big themes that I
wanted to ask you about it's the last
thing I really wanted to to focus on
today is there's been such a huge rise
in the conversation around neurod
Divergence which we talked about in part
last time you looked at my brain you
looked at my brain and we did some tests
and such and you spoke to some of my
colleagues and people that know me I
think they did some surveys about me as
well and you concluded that I had ADHD
so many people are being diagnosed with
with ADHD it seems when we look at some
of the numbers around the increase in
diagnosis it's quite it's quite alarming
and I wonder why that is are people
being born with more ADHD or is it an
increase in the
diagnosis um is there a pop culture
element to it where it's become quite
popular to say that you have ADHD if you
like forget your keys or something what
is it in your view so ADHD is real
there's a significant genetic component
to it but we're also living in a society
that promotes its expression
so the more sugary cereals with red dye
number
40 increases
hyperactivity the more gadgets you give
them so they can't pay
attention um the less they're outside in
the sun the more they're playing video
games all of those things increase the
expression of
ADHD
um again something I know more about
than I want to um I I have a book called
healing add and I write about my own
personal experience being married to
someone who has ADHD and having several
of my kids
who have it
um that it's real and left
untreated they're all sorts of
consequences so people always ask if you
think of medicine like Rin or adderal
people go what are the side effects and
it has side effects sometimes it can
increase tick sometimes it'll cause
sleep problems sometimes you'll lose
some weight or decrease your appetite um
but they don't ask me the other question
and I always want to make sure they do
is what are the side
effects of not
treating
ADHD and they are things like School
failure incarceration bankruptcy divorce
it's serious now for someone like you
who's really driven and very
bright for you the
consequences and this is going to sound
crazy but it's under
achievement or it takes
more for you to be at your
best than if you had it
treated
but I have this an example of a
14-year-old who was literally failing in
school
and conflict driven with everyone around
him so people didn't really want to be
near
him and I diagnosed
him started with natural things and they
help but not enough put him on conserta
a form of methylphenidate or
Rin and he went from
failing
to all A's and B's and he got into the
high school he wanted to get into which
was very
competitive and he's easy to be
around that's a win because it's going
to change the
trajectory of his life and I like that I
remember you talking last time about
your daughter we have the clip don't we
of Dr talking about his daughter we can
just insert it here I have a daughter
and the truth is and this is going to
sound awful I never thought she was very
smart and and I'm ashamed of myself for
thinking that and um she's staying up
every night till 1 or 2 o'clock in the
morning to get her homework done and one
night she came just crying to me and she
said
dad I don't think I can ever be as smart
as my friends and it just broke my heart
and
I scanned her the next day and I'd
actually scanned her originally but I
had no experience in scans this was like
1991 I'm
like child psychiatrist and an expert in
add and I didn't see it in my own
child
and the next day I put her on Tiny dose
of Ridin scanned her again and her brain
normalized
normalized a week later I had dinner
with her and I'm like do you notice any
difference and she said oh my God she
said a class seemed like it always took
eight hours to just do that one class
and I was always lost and I'm very
religious I was praying to God that the
teacher wouldn't call on me because I
was lost she said now that same class
goes by in about 20 minutes and my hands
up
because I track what's going on and that
child who had always gotten B's and C's
but with great effort her first report
card was straight A's the next 10 years
straight A she actually got into the
University of Ed University of
edinburgh's veterinarian school one of
the best vet schools in the world where
they clone Dolly the sheep and
if I wouldn't have figured that out she
would have been condemned to a lifetime
of
mediocrity hating herself working so
hard to get a mediocre
result optimizing your brain and
medicine's never the first thing I think
about but it's one of the things I think
about because I just want to use all the
tools of my tool tool box to optimize
your brain because if I optimize your
brain I optimize your life it was really
powerful and something that I then spoke
to lots of my friends about and such um
one of the things I've always struggled
with with ADHD in terms of my
understanding is some people that I know
H that have
ADHD they just they're so remarkably
different to me and they're so
remarkably different from each other so
I think about one of my friends that has
it very very different in terms of
productivity symptomology versus someone
like me
who for example in my case I'm very
focused I think I can be very focused
not always but when I'm into something I
can I can focus on it for a long period
of time in fact people don't know this
but it's worth me saying um my last book
I went to Barley for I think it was
either 11 or 14 days and I came out of
the Jungle with the book so I went into
the jungle with um basically 33
sentences individual sentences I knew
what the chapter titles were they came
out of the Jungle and handed my
publisher penguin the manuscript after
that that period in The Jungle which
basically meant that for those 11 or 14
days I can't remember the exact number I
sat there for about 10 hours a day and
did I was obviously getting distracted
once in a while but I I wrote the whole
book in uh about 14 about 14 days decent
book I'm so jealous um but I but for me
it's an example of the you when I think
of ADHD I think of like attention
deficit and again I don't know much
about ADHD so I'm very naive I represent
most of the population probably in that
regard but I don't think I have an
attention deficit
necessarily well for things that are new
novel highly interesting stimulating or
frightening yeah people with ADD can pay
attention just fine that's why a lot of
people who have it though I don't have
it like if I love my history teacher I'm
like
focused but then when I go to
Geometry I can't do it at all yeah
that's the story of me in school
it's it should be it's like love is a
drug if you love something well you can
do
it but the problem is most of life you
don't love and so you end up with this
really sort of AR
IC attention
disorder
um and they tend to gravitate
toward things you know I I see hear this
story a lot
unfortunately is they they experiment in
college and they take a little bit of
methamphetamine and it helps them and
they're more focused
and but then they don't know how to
manage it and they end up taking more
and more and they end up getting
addicted and it steals their soul
love can you see love on the
brain Helen fiser who's a neuroscientist
in New Jersey has actually studied
love and new love shows up is increased
activity in the dopamine centers of the
brain and it makes you just a bit
obsessive I think of new love as
dopamine but
lasting love
more like
opiates so new love when you break up is
sort of like getting off
cocaine hard but not that
bad lasting love
if it goes away and we talked about
grief
earlier it's like it's ripping your skin
off it's really hard sort of like
getting off of
heroin do people come to you that are
heartbroken a lot what do they say I
can't stop think that their brain gets
into um anxiety sadness
and that that person just lives in every
fun place in their brain and they can't
get over it and it can be quite messy
for them what is the change that you
would like to see in the
world well I'm actually working on it
um I want
everybody to just ask this one
question and we mentioned my work with
BJ fog on how people change and he um
talks about tiny habits what's the
smallest
thing I can do that will make the
biggest
difference and if
I could impact the world it would be
through one question whatever I'm doing
right now is it good for my brain or bad
for it
I want to teach people to love their
brains and to just make better decisions
for the health of their brain because
then everything follows that so good for
my brain or bad for it I'm 15 I have a
developing brain my brain is milting
itself which means it's wrapping all my
nerves all my brain cells with a white
fatty substance called myin and my
frontal Oaks are not done until I'm
25 oh I'm going to love my brain so I'm
not pouring crap in my body with what I
eat or what I drink because it's bad for
my brain when I'm
60 and I'm
stressed because my football team's not
winning I'm not going for Extra beer
because I'd love my brain and I'm going
to get to a healthy weight
because I love my brain that's the
change that's why I think God put me on
the
earth I wanted to do something um was
just thinking about it as you were
speaking then about the one simple thing
that I can do
to help my brain and to love my
brain when you think about behaviors and
habits that are popular and trendy at
the moment are there any that stand out
to you as being particularly good for
the brain or particularly bad for the
brain CU I had a couple come to mind
that I wanted to throw at you I mean one
of them that's exploding in the UK at
the moment is paddle which is kind of I
think you call it pickle ball here good
for my brain bad for my brain good for
your brain really good do you know what
brain you when you scanned my brain you
told me that you said for the next six
months Steve I need you to take some
Omega-3 do this do this do this and I'd
like you to play more racket Sports I
built a paddle Court in my garden so I
have a paddle Court in my garden um in
Cape Town and I love playing it now and
when I play it all the time I said Dr
aan said it's good for my brain um but
it's exploding it's exploding across
Europe really but really across much of
the world now p and here in the US too
oh really and it's so good for your
brain
because it's working your sh Bellum and
I told you that because yours was
sleepy and is you activate this and you
do that with coordination exercises it
then activates your frontal upes does
that mean that people that are
uncoordinated have a cerebellum issue
yes oh
really okay and the more you do it the
better coordination you
develop and that's why coordination
exercises for kids so we talked about
kids is is you want to do that with them
early play sports but not Sports where
they're going to get a head injury right
I mean we have to be smarter than we are
um but when I was young my mother who's
now 93 was the pingpong champion in the
neighborhood and she was really good and
she never let us beat her until we could
and
but she was always
encouraging I've got um I was looking
then as you were speaking about
different trends at the moment that are
either good or bad for the brain and one
big Trend at the moment is
neuroplasticity training lots of people
are doing games and using other things
to like there's apps you can get that
are neuroplasticity training apps does
any of that stuff work some of it some
of it works and if you're so for example
if you're doing memorization games do
them while you're on the
bike now not in the street but if you're
on a stationary
bike and you're doing those games it's
been found that
exercise increases blood flow to the
hippocampus meaning you're more likely
to remember it and you're strengthening
your brain in the process so exercise
with new
learning stunning so if I want to learn
something I should do it while walking
or moving in
motion right so if you're listening to a
language app for example do it while
you're walking mindfulness and
meditation good or bad for the brain
great I published three studies on a
calini yoga form of meditation called
Kon Crea it's a 12 minute meditation I
always say it's the perfect add
meditation because it's only 12 minutes
and for 12 minutes you do this
sa it's two minutes out loud two minutes
Whispering four minutes silently to
yourself two minutes Whispering two
minutes out loud you're done sat ma
birth Life Death reborn birth Life Death
reborn but the one we studied is sat ta
na ma and
so if they look it up kytin
Crea um activates your cerebellum
activates your frontal loes calms down
your emotional brain people who did that
for 12 minutes for eight weeks their
resting frontal lobe function was
Stronger so simple what the hell is
going on
there I think it's the focused attention
plus you're doing a coordination
meditation cold therapy cold exposure
therapy ice bath those kinds of things
good or bad for the
brain um I think you have to be careful
with it because it can trigger atrial
fibrillation um I think taking a cold
shower is probably good for your brain
because it's going to shortterm increase
dopamine and sort of give you a jolt
loving your
job absolutely great for your brain
if you're learning new things people who
are in a job that does not require new
learning have a higher incidence of
Alzheimer's disease so if you're
stagnant in your work you have a higher
risk of alheim and like if I just read
brain scans all day well I know how to
do it I'm not learning anything
new so I do
that but I also am writing about
something I don't know
about um or I'm learning something new
what if you're working with I'm
sorry I love the job but I'm working
with bad for your brain chronic
stress increases cortisol and I think
everybody should sort of know their
Baseline cortisol level
and cortisol shrinks the
hippocampus and puts fat on your belly
so that's two very bad things for your
brain breath work that's a big Trend
excellent excellent you want to break a
panic
attack the 15 second breath 4 seconds in
hold it for a second and a half 8
seconds out hold it for a second and a
half you just do that four or five times
your whole nervous system will calm down
and the research shows take twice as
long to breathe out as you breathe in
that's why 4 seconds in 8 seconds out
yeah shift your nervous system doesn't
it yes it increases something called
vagal tone okay some bad things then
social media usage chronic social media
usage good for the brain bad for the
brain because you're constantly
comparing yourself to people who aren't
real
what about workaholism and hustle
culture
so I love my
work am I addicted to it I don't know
but I love
it when they say people are Workaholics
and it's bad for the brain it's their
working with
or doing something they don't
want like or doing it for the money but
without other
purpose microplastics that's a big Tri
awful for the brain one of the major
causes of hormone disruption and
cancer and other environment thank you
for not giving me a plastic water bottle
yeah it's okay imagine if imagine if we
did that when we spend long a lot of
time these days talking about the
microplastics and other environmental
toxins that I think people are becoming
more aware of now which is good noise
pollution bad for the brain and if if it
hurts your hearing hearing loss is
actually one of the risk factors for
Alzheimer's why is that I did I did a
hear because you're not getting input
right and if you're not getting
appropriate
input your brain starts to
atropy and if you don't hear what other
people are saying and you have a lot of
ants you have a high negativity bias is
you can actually begin to get a bit
paranoid and fill in the empty spaces
with
negativity I just bought some new Apple
airpods and when I connected them to my
phone it said you want to do a hearing
test so I did the hearing test and then
I asked my girlfriend I said you should
do this hearing test as well because I
needed something to compare it to and I
was a little bit shocked um it said I
hadn't lost any hearing yet but my
hearing was significantly
not as good as hers and I remember
thinking gosh you know this is but I
didn't have any idea that it was linked
to Alzheimers at all so now I've turned
down the volume for the first time in my
life because I think your hearing
declines regardless really of what you
do with age anyway um but as you said
earlier like starting from a better
Baseline when you're talking about the
brain reserves is really the game I
think with aging my last point is a my
last question is a bit of a
seems to be uncorrelated but the world
is heading towards a world that's driven
by artificial intelligence it's like all
the all the rage at the moment if you
log on the internet people talking about
they're going to lose their jobs all of
these new tools that allow us to
optimize our lives in a variety of
different ways when you think about the
world of AI that we're heading into
there's so many ways that I imagine it's
going to make your job easier as someone
who's doing scans of brains and so
on but do you think artificial
intelligence is going to be good or bad
for our brain
I think in the short run it's going to
be bad
because your brain is going to do less
and that's bad for the brain I I think
it's fascinating to watch what's going
to happen and ultimately in the words of
my friend Byron Katie argue with reality
welcome to hell we need to figure out
how to use said to enhance Our Lives
rather than to steal brain
development and so much of Technology
you haven't talked about this has stolen
brain
development um when video games came
into my house was actually 1987 I
remember my son was
11 he was a straight A
student and then he
wasn't and then we started fighting
about it's like you can play for a half
an hour and then like I took it out of
the house because I saw it as an agent
of thrilling his brain to death
deadening the dopamine
structures um and then I've watched this
whole group of kids grow up with very
cool video
games that are I think damaging their
brain so unleash technology without any
Neuroscience study on the impact of
brain development it's a bad idea our
brains getting bigger or smaller do does
anybody
know I don't know wondering if tech
interesting question yeah because if ask
GPT oh gosh yeah is it funny well it's
it's things for you this is the thing
although one caution with chat GPT it
sucks if you ask it for medical
advice it often will make mistakes and
so there are other sites I like better
that I trust
more social connections obviously
another point on that because there's
now saw articles where men are getting
into relationships with an AI character
of a woman they like and you know social
connection is so good for the brain so I
wonder if artificial social connection
is going to is probably not great for
for the
brain because your brain doesn't have to
work as hard with an artificial
especially one you created yeah right
your brain is when when you're with like
another real person your brain has to do
a lot more calculations to make that
work than with someone you can just
trash anymore well you'd program it for
dopamine wouldn't you if you're making a
friend or partner yourself
what's the most important thing we
haven't talked about that we should have
talked about
Dr I think purpose
and um what is purpose matter connection
to a higher power well I always think
when I assess patients of them in four
big circles it's like what's the biology
we talked a lot about the brain what's
the psychology so we talked about
development a little bit and Trauma and
ants what's the Social Circle like
what's going on in your life now and who
you're connected with and we talked
about
love but we didn't really talk about the
spiritual Circle which is so what's the
point why am I here am I here because of
random chance because of an explosion
that happened billions of years ago or
do I believe in Creative Design
where I'm really created for a purpose
that is to make the world a better place
and I find people who live
without purpose have a higher incidence
of depression have a higher incidence of
loneliness have a higher
incidence of
dementia and
so I encourage all of my P patience to
seek and live with purpose it's one of
the reasons the onepage miracle is so
important to me what do I want
relationships work money physical
emotional spiritual health which is
really the
why question and a lot of my colleagues
go well how can you believe in God if
you're a scientist and I'm like
do you know anything about physics that
the second law of physics is entropy
things go from order to
disorder I'm like I think there's an
order to this and that I'm here talking
to
you and there's a purpose behind it
that's greater than
me studies suggest that religious belief
can be associated with differences in
brain structure and
function while there is no single
religious brain certain patterns have
been observed in Neuroscience research
the prefrontal cortex involved in
decision- making mortality and
self-regulation tends to be more active
in religious
individuals and their right temporal
lobe tends to be
bigger there's another study with that
and if if there is a
God and we communicate with God there's
got to be a neurosci
mechanism for that and Michael perser
is's a researcher out of the University
of Laurentian University in Canada he
would put helmets on people and give
them low volt electrical
activity and whenever he would stimulate
the right temporal loow people would get
a sensed presence they would actually
feel the presence of God in the
room I just think that's so interesting
and does that mean that the brain makes
up God or that the brain has Pathways to
experience
God has you I think it's an interesting
question I actually did a study on
prayer uh we have a foundation called
the change your brain foundation and we
rais money for research Education
Service and um I did a prayer study of
conversational prayer I pray for you and
speaking in tongues which is
channeling the holy spirit in Christian
tradition and it was so interesting and
there's actually been other studies uh
Andrew Newberg uh who studied channelers
in Brazil they would channel the dead
and the idea is if you're going to
channel
an outside Spirit you have to turn down
the noise in your brain so that you can
sort of fear the other frequencies and
that was our hypothesis and 60% of our
subjects
dropped their brain activity when they
were speaking in tongues which sounds so
interesting one completely activated the
dopamine centers so I'm looking at him
like I bet you do this
L
prayer prayer can change the brain I
mean we talked about meditation changing
the brain and Dr Newberg again studied
Tibetan Monks while they meditated and
Franciscan nuns while they prayed and
they found very
similar
changes strengthens the prefrontal
cortex reduces Stress and Anxiety
increases dopamine changes brain
connectivity thickens the cortex
promotes
neuroplasticity if you pray now what if
you're not religious cuz I I don't think
I believe in any particular
God but I would like some of these
benefits so I guess I could achieve them
by
meditation and those kinds of things I
could still pray I've got no issue with
praying I don't know what would be
praying and you could be curious yeah
I've got no issue with praying I just
don't know what i' be praying to praying
to the universe I guess spirituality is
another big Trend I wonder if that's
good for the brain if any I guess
depends yeah on is it a healthy
tradition or is it an
unhealthy tradition and I've I've seen
both I've seen some
religions uh being very rigid and
shaming and I've seen
others you know be more open and seeking
you've scanned 260
thousand brains roughly how has that if
at all changed
your belief in a
god
um you know I believed in God since I
was since I can
remember and there's not been one thing
in my life that's caused me to not
believe so I I always
thought going back to the second law
physics that if it's random
chance it just doesn't make sense that
randomly we would get a brain cell that
has DNA and a
mitochondria it's like it's it's
statistically
impossible and I'm just like we are so
beautifully
made I just don't get the whole thing
so one thing we haven't talked about is
the LA fires and the impact of
disaster on the brain and I grew up in
Los Angeles
and I'm just
horrified by what
happened
um and we talked that my Foundation is
actually going to give away a hundred
evaluations for
firefighters and I almost feel bad I I
did the big NFL study and it was really
cool and it was a lot of fun for me but
NFL players aren't Heroes they're
entertainers firefighters are heroes
First Responders are heroes and what
I've seen with
firefighters this makes me so
sad because they have damaged
brains often because of the toxins that
they're exposed
to the emotional trauma that goes with
that
job and the head trauma that also goes
with this with things falling on them
and they have a higher suicide rate than
the general population significantly
higher I think it's like 25% higher
and shouldn't we be teaching them about
brain health and go hey look this is a
brain
damaging job but we need you to do it so
all the way
along let's see and repair your brain
let's make sure your reserve is
something special rather than we had a
really bad day at work let's go get
drunk
together let's
Elevate brain health to the
people who say
us why is that emotion so raw for you
but just thinking of what happened one
of my close friends lost his
hope and then he went to work and did a
consult for me I'm just blown away by
him but you know we're so close to the
sadness of what
happened and I have a clinic that we had
to evacuate and I have doctors that they
had to evacuate the
group trauma is
so high
and yet the people who care for
us were not doing a good job of caring
for them and I
think I have parted the
answer and and I just wish I could do
more incredibly kind of you to offer to
scan 105 fighter brains yeah and
hopefully as our foundation you know can
raise money we can do thousands of them
how does one go about supporting your
foundation where where do we go to
support it so changey your brain. org
changey yourb brain. org yeah we have a
closing tradition as you know where the
last guest leaves a question for the
next and the question left for you is
what advice would you give a
couple who want to start a
family I love that question so much
uh is if you want to start a
family you have to get your bodies ready
so she was born with all the eggs she'll
ever
have and you want to give them time like
a year or more of good
nutrition and the child no no the mom
okay so my so my partner I'm someone
that wants to start a family so you want
to
go what I'm
eating what I'm
thinking the stress I'm under is going
to impact the Next
Generation what are the right brain and
body habits that we both can
do to get our bodies in the best shape
is this good for my brain and body or is
it bad for it and really focus on good
you know a lot of people who are
drinking they actually stop drinking
when they find out they're pregnant
remember the brain develops a day 21 you
may not even know you're pregnant at day
21 just let that roll around your head a
little bit so I love this question is oh
I can start to get my brain and my
ovaries and my sperm
ready to connect to be healthy so I
think that's the
advice I would give
them Dr Daniel lman thank you so much
once again for your time and thank you
for the wisdom and value you've given to
my audience over the years like as I was
saying before we started filming I get
stopped all the time everywhere I go
people telling me about you I told you I
stopped yesterday well I was having a
spa treatment I won't say what it is cuz
people will roast me but I was having a
first first first of of its kind for me
Spar treatment and the lady turned to me
20 minutes in and was like by the way
thank you so much for having Dan Dr
Daniel Aon on because he helped me
understand my ADHD etc etc so and I see
that absolute love and admiration for
you in the comment section every time
where people recount stories from
decades ago where their kid came to see
you and how you've transformed their
life I actually think the top comment on
our last episode was someone who I think
they they came to see you 15 years ago
and they said that you changed their
son's life and that is just over and
over and over and over again in the
comments so the life you've lived is
such an important one and it's added so
much value and um hope and so many it's
turned on the lights for so many people
in so many ways so on behalf of all
those people and behalf of the tens of
millions of people who've tuned into our
conversations thank you so much I really
appreciate it well Stephen thank you the
last time I was on we got calls from all
over the world I mean obviously you're
doing amazing purposeful
work thank you isn't this cool every
single conversation I have here on the
Dio at the very end of it you'll know I
asked the guest to leave a question in
the Diary of a CEO and what we've done
is we've turned every single question
written in the Diary of a CEO into these
conversation cards that you can play at
home so you've got every guest we've
ever had their question and on the back
of it if you scan that QR code you get
to watch the person who answered that
question we're finally revealing all of
the questions and the people that
answered the question the brand new
version two updated conversation cards
are out right now at the conversation
cards.com they' sold out twice
instantaneously so if you are interested
in getting hold of some limited edition
conversation cards I really really
recommend acting quickly this has always
blown my mind a little bit 53% of you
that listen to the show regularly
haven't yet subscribed to the show so
could I ask you for a favor before we
start if you like the show and you like
what we do here and you want to support
us the free simple way that you can do
just that is by hitting the Subscribe
button and my commitment to you is if
you do that then I'll do everything in
my power me and my team to make sure
that this show is better for you every
single week we'll listen to your
feedback we'll find the guests that you
want me to speak to and we'll continue
to do what we do thank you so much
[Music]
a